+++
title = 'Masculinity in Macbeth'
date = 2024-11-02T16:59:22-04:00
year = 2024
draft = false
categories = ["literature"]
+++

Shakespeare’s tragedies, to some extent, all ask the question: “What is a man?” Many of his plays demonstrate masculinity as a supreme ideal, the spur to action, the height of heroism. Hamlet encompasses his entire eulogy for his father in four simple words: “He was a man.” The male characters of Romeo and Juliet are all desperate to assert and take possession of their manhood as they engage in acts of masculine aggression. As Gregory, the Capulet servant, puts it, to be a man is to move, to stir, to stand and be valiant. Yet, this ideal is an impossible one. The pursuit of masculinity is never consummated; the attempt at self-completion only ever results in death. And no play exemplifies this paradoxical nature of masculinity as poignantly as _The Tragedy of Macbeth_.

_The Tragedy of Macbeth_, also known as _The Scottish Play_, stands as one of Shakespeare’s most unadulterated tragedies. Almost devoid of comic relief, the play’s latter half even has uncharacteristically few instances of word play. Set against the historical backdrop of 11th century Scotland, Macbeth tells a bloody story of betrayal, madness, and the pitfalls of unfettered ambition. Macbeth, a seemingly valiant and noble general, is returning from a victorious battle with his fellow general Banquo when he encounters three witches who prophesize that Macbeth will become king. Spurred on by his wife, he murders the incumbent king, Duncan, and both the human and natural worlds are thrown out of balance.  Macbeth is crowned king, but he does not feel safe in his throne, and instead perceives the sword of Damocles suspended above his crown. He lives in perpetual anxiety and paranoia, which prompts him to commit increasingly irrational acts of violence. A figurative and literal darkness broods over Scotland as Macbeth leaves a trail of blood in his wake, each murder more heinous than the last. His downfall is finally brought on when his thanes rise up against him, decapitating him and installing Malcolm, Duncan’s eldest son, in his place. 

The word “manliness” and its cognates are ever-present in the background of the play, but it is Lady Macbeth who first brings them to the foreground. In her soliloquy in Act 1, Scene 5, she expresses a desire to cast aside her femininity and embrace masculine qualities, which she believes are characterized by “direst cruelty,” and which she believes Macbeth lacks. She perceives him as effeminate, or as she puts it, “too full o' th' milk of human kindness.” She later taunts her husband by questioning his worth as a man, labeling him a coward who is “afeard/ To be in the same in [his] own act and valor/as [he] art in desire” (1.7.43-44). To her, a man is someone who acts in accordance to his desires and takes what he wants by force. As Macbeth wavers in uncertainty, Lady Macbeth takes the lead in orchestrating the murder of the gracious Duncan. Yet, despite Duncan’s saintly status, he and Lady Macbeth share the same murderous and primitive attitude towards masculinity. The supposed meek and paternal king is overjoyed at reports of savagery that any modern reader would disdain at, as he relishes in not only victory, but bloodshed. Though he is not explicitly guilty of any brutality himself, he nonetheless perpetuates Scotland’s violent warrior ethics that exalts men for their prowess in slaying other men rather than their moral character. Ironically, Macbeth is the one to introduce a more civilized and moral definition of man by refusing to murder Duncan, saying that he “dare[s] do all that may become a man. Who dares do more is none” (1.7.51-52). Even Malcolm, whom readers are led to assume will be a better king than Macbeth, associates manliness with murder, destruction, and rage as he urges Macduff to take his bloody vengeance against Macbeth. 

Though Macbeth’s desire to become king is made clear at the beginning of the play, his ambition may not be as strong as Lady Macbeth and the reader believe it to be. Macbeth is never shown to possess a particularly powerful longing for the crown, he is only lost in short reveries that can not hold a candle to Lady Macbeth’s malicious and calculated plans of execution. When Lady Macbeth persuades him to abandon his moral qualms, she does not make an appeal to ambition or the glory of the crown, but to his manhood. Paralleling the porter’s harangue on alcohol and sexual impotence, she asks him, “Was the hope drunk/Wherein you dress’d yourself?” Macbeth is the drunken man from the porter’s speech; his desire is provoked, but he lacks the “manhood” required to perform the deed. She even goes as far as to imply that his very sexuality will be put into question if he doesn’t usurp the throne, saying, “from this time/Such I account thy love” (1.7.43-44). Afraid of being bested by his wife in this contest of masculine prowess, he reluctantly gives in. He abandons the gentler virtues of mankind in favor of the violent and bloody man to reassert his masculinity, wielding the dagger and all its phallic implications.

His murder of Duncan, however, does not reclaim his virility as he hoped it would. In fact, his insecurity is felt more acutely than ever. He laments how the witches have placed upon his head “a fruitless crown/And put a barren scepter in [his] grip,” implying that he has no heirs and suggesting impotence. Such sterility is directly contrasted with Banquo’s lineage that will eventually ascend to the position of supreme power. Once again feeling that his masculinity is threatened, he turns to what he is familiar with: murder. 

Macbeth’s descent into madness and evil brings him no nearer to his virile masculine ideal while simultaneously pushing him away from the humane, civilized man. During his outburst at the dinner party, he exclaims that he would rather face “the rugged Russian bear,/The armed rhinoceros, or th’ Hyrcan tiger” than the spirit of another human being (3.4.123-124). His renunciation of all human virtues has placed him on the same level as beasts, making them his appropriate adversaries rather than men. Ultimately, Macbeth’s failure lay not in the overabundance or perversion of his manliness, but in his lack of it, both in the sense of raging ambition and civilized humanity. He is neither entirely on either side nor a harmonious blend of both, tottering on the edge until he inevitably falls to his doom. 
